Equifax.
The company whose name sounds like a theatrical production
in which Daniel Radcliffe, plays a horse
-that fucks a fax machine. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Now Equifax,
is one of the big three credit reporting agencies.
The companies who keep financial data on all of us.
So that people like uh, lenders and landlords can decide,
whether or not we are trustworthy.
So, Equifax controls some of our most sensitive information
and about a month ago, we learned this.
NEWSCASTER 1: Breaking news from the credit monitoring company,
Equifax.
Cyber thieves making off with private information
of 143 million Americans,
nearly half the U.S. Population.
It's actually worse.
It's now 145 million Americans
and I have got good news and bad news there.
The good news is that by "private information"
they don't mean your Google search history, so,
nobody yet knows about the time you searched for,
"wario porn (real),"
or "world's richest dogs looking for assistants,"
or "can loneliness cause the farts?"
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
But the bad news is, the information they got,
could well be all this.
NEWSCASTER 2: It's your name, social security number,
birth date, driver's license and addresses where you lived,
information that is mostly permanent
unless you're in federal witness protection.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Wow! Okay,
so, that does sound bad,
but here's a simple solution, just move 145 million people
into the witness protection program.
That means Jones' uh, you are the Thompson's,
uh, Thompson's you're the Campbell's,
Campbell's you're the Mendoza's,
Mendoza's, you're the Jones'.
Wait-- wait hold on, Jones' you shouldn't be there,
I made you the Thompson's.
No, Thompson's I made you the Campbell's.
Campbell's, you're the Mendoza's.
Mendoza's, why are you there?
You should be living in the Jones' house in Phoenix.
Oh no, I shouldn't have said Phoenix.
-Oh God, the Jones' are dead! -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
-The Jones' are dead! -(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING)
Forget the whole plan, I was just trying to help!
I'm sorry for trying! Oh, they're dead!
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
-(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING) -And-- and I know--
-I know there might be... -(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING)
...some younger people watching this
and, well hold on-- who cares?
We're the first generation
to routinely send pictures of our junk to each other
-over the internet. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Why should we give a shit
about someone seeing our social security numbers?
But you should know,
criminals can do a lot more with that number
than they can with a picture of your dick.
This information is gonna be sold
left and right on the black market.
People are gonna be able to open up credit cards
for the rest of your life once they have that information.
They can go out and purchase a home in your name.
They can open bank accounts, take car loans.
Someone who has your social security number
could actually take a job, they could file taxes
and even claim your kids as dependents
and be gone with your refund
before you ever actually file a tax return.
No! No!
No, the tax benefit,
is the whole point of having children.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Without that,
all you're left with is your actual children.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Which, you know...
-Ugh! -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
The point here is, it's a huge problem
and in any other era,
this would've been the biggest news story
for a month, but--
but now that every day's headline
is simply the words,
"Everything batshit bananas again today,"
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -it slipped under the radar,
but it is worth asking, "How the hell did this happen?"
Because the short answer is,
the people in-charge have done literally everything wrong.
And let's start with just--
just the way that Equifax told us about the hack.
In early September, their then CEO, Rick Smith,
a man with a face and name so bland
he may as well be called, "Human Person,"
or "Frasier re-run."
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -He issued a taped apology,
but his remorse seemed a little less than heart felt.
On July 29th of this year, we discovered that attackers
had gained unauthorized access to certain Equifax data files.
This is clearly a disappointing event
and one that strikes at the heart...
of who we are and what we do.
-Holy shit! -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Rick Smith is so alarmingly mechanical
you probably have to put him in rice every time he gets wet.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Now, notably
he mentioned there that Equifax learned about the breach
on July 29th,
but even more notably that video was uploaded in September,
which is, and this is true, after July.
So, Equifax knew about the breach
for nearly six weeks
before telling the public and they claim
that they needed that time because the investigation was
"complex and time consuming."
Although, that's not all that happened in that time span.
NEWSCASTER 3: Three Equifax executives
sold nearly two million dollars in company stock,
days after the data breach was discovered.
Wow!
Selling stock before the public knows there's a problem
is one of those thing that looks suspicious
whether or not you're actually doing something wrong.
It's like, walking into a petting zoo,
with a bib on.
What exactly are you planning
-on messily devouring in there? -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And Equifax defended that saying,
none of the executives in question
including their Chief Financial Officer
knew about the data breach, which raises another question,
-"How is that even possible?" -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Did they just ignore emails with the subject lines,
"Breach!" "Following up on breach!"
"Where the fuck are you? Breach, breach, breach!"
And, "Just spoke to you in person about breach
and you just stared blankly at me, and then said,
'I'm gonna order from the salad place.'"
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And if you are getting frustrated already
with this kind of incompetence,
you're gonna need to pace yourself,
because this story, gets a lot worse.
Apparently, there were multiple points
where this hack could have been prevented
and one of them is incredible,
because Equifax were alerted by Homeland security,
back in March,
that they needed to fix a critical vulnerability
in their software.
But as lawmakers discovered at a recent hearing,
that's not what happened.
There was one person apparently, who forgot to tell somebody
that they had a piece of software
that needed to be patched.
Yeah, it is not ideal,
that a company guarding such valuable information
leaves something that important down to one person.
It's like finding out that Chase Bank
has a big red button labeled, "Lose everyone's money,
and the only thing stopping anyone from pushing it,
-is Frank." -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And look, I love Frank.
I love the guy, but what if he has to pee?
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
A-- and I want to tell you that this is an anomaly,
but Equifax has had multiple headline-grabbing breaches
over the years,
and that is not even counting smaller incidents like this.
I checked my credit report the other day
online with Equifax...
That was it, and next thing I know I have 300 pieces of mail
sittin' in my mailbox.
NEWSCASTER 4: Every single one of these is addressed to her,
but they're not hers.
Instead, she got other people's credit reports.
Now, names, social security numbers,
dates of birth, current and previous addresses
bank and loan account numbers,
all stacked up on a kitchen table in Biddeford.
-(AUDIENCE GROANING) -Yeah, I mean,
that not great, is it?
And it really should have set off red flags at Equifax,
when hundreds of different credit reports
were being mailed to the same address.
What exactly did you think had happened there
that every single Fraggle checks their credit at once,
down at Fraggle Rock?
-Down at Fraggle Rock? -(AUDIENCE CLAPPING)
-Now-- very nice. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
-And-- -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And I know that other companies have had breaches
but none remotely as damaging as this new Equifax one,
'cause remember, this isn't Target
exposing customer's credit cards.
This is compromising social security numbers
the things that thieves could use
to open new credit cards in your name
and if your information was stolen, which remember,
is about a 50-50 chance, it could haunt you forever.
You don't change your birth date,
you don't change your social security number.
Those who've been, uh, jeopardized by this hack
will have to protect themselves for years, until they're dead.
It's true and just think about that.
There is only one other thing
that you have to constantly protect yourself from
until you're dead.
-And that's fucking death! -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And you would hope that Equifax would do a decent job
of mitigating the damage.
After all,
they did have nearly six weeks to work on a response,
but instead, their fuck ups continued.
For instance, they created a website
for concerned consumers to go to,
but then this happened:
The site that Equifax started is called Equifax Security 2017.
But a developer named Nick Sweeting,
wanted to show, how easy it is
to create a similar fake site, so he did.
He called it, Security Equifax 2017.
(AUDIENCE GROANING)
Exactly, someone created a fake site
and if you're thinking, "Well, who would be dumb enough
to fall for that?"
Equifax! That's who!
Because they tweeted links to that fake site
at least eight times!
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING IN DISBELIEF)
Despite the fact that site had a couple of tiny clues
that it might be fake from the headline reading,
"Why did Equifax use a domain
that's so easily impersonated by phishing sites?"
to the fact that when you clicked on their Frequently Asked Questions,
this happened.
♪ ("NEVER GONNA GIVE YOU UP" BY RICK ASTLEY PLAYING) ♪
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING AND CHEERING)
Well played pranksters, you have my respect.
But look, don't worry.
Equifax says that they are tightening up their operation.
And to see how well that they've done on that,
You-- you can just go to, equifaxfraudprevention.com,
not because it's their site but because it's our site.
We bought it two days ago,
and if you'll go there you'll find the message,
"How were we still able to do this?
Why haven't you learned anything?"
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
But wait-- wait! Because there is even more.
'Cause Equifax also offered consumers
a year of free credit monitoring
but when people tried to sign-up for the service,
they noted something.
Guess what? You lock into Equifax terms of service
-when sign-up for it, -Ah!
which means that you can't sue the company.
You've gotta resolve any disputes in forced arbitration.
Exactly! You'll be giving up your right to sue.
So legally, your best recourse at that point would be,
shaking your fist at the heavens while shouting, "Equifax!"
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Now, they-- they've since rescinded that clause,
although many frustrated people are now signing up
for third party credit monitoring services like,
LifeLock, who've been advertising everywhere.
And they've seen a real surge in business
in the wake of this breach, although,
if you're considering LifeLock because you are mad at Equifax,
there is something you're gonna need to know.
According to filings with the SCC,
LifeLock purchases credit monitoring services from
-Equifax. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING NERVOUSLY)
And that means someone buys credit monitoring
through LifeLock.
LifeLock turns around and passes some of that revenue
directly along to Equifax.
Is that right Mr. Smith?
That is correct.
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING IN DISBELIEF)
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
-It's true. Some of-- -(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING)
some of the money that you pay to LifeLock
goes right back to fucking Equifax,
which could only be more infuriating
if you then found out that the rest of it goes
to Toys For Todds.
A charity that purchases sex toys
-for grown men named Todd. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Buy your own sex toys Todd, we can't carry you on this one.
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And look, Equifax connections aside,
LifeLock has had repeated issues itself,
including settlements with the FTC
and a truly disastrous ad campaign
a few years back.
I'm Todd Davis,
and I'm here to prove just how safe
your identity can be with LifeLock.
That's my real social security number.
Yeah, LifeLock's then-CEO Todd Davis,
actually put his real social security number,
457-55-5462,
on a truck and billboards.
For a time, it was impossible to escape
his social security number,
-457-55-5462. -(AUDIENCE CHUCKLING)
And that was a very cocky move
and one that resulted in him having his identity stolen
-13 times. -(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING)
And I'm guessing, that the defense
for the people who took it was,
"I didn't steal his identity
I literally got it off the back of a truck."
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -So, to put it mildly,
LifeLock, may not be your best solution
to the Equifax crisis, which brings us to the question,
"What is?"
Well, consumer advocates told us
that the one big step everyone should take,
is to go through all three large credit reporting companies,
that's Equifax, Experian and TransUnion,
and freeze your credit.
That way no one can access it, including you,
until you unfreeze it.
Now the companies also offer
their own credit protection products,
with names like, Trusted ID
or Credit Lock Plus.
But, they are often more expensive
and offer fewer consumer protection.
So, if you need a way to remember this,
locks, are something you don't want.
Think of Justin Bieber's dreadlocks.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -A terrible decision
to be avoided!
Whereas freezes are great.
Uh, think of this tiny penguin losing its frozen mind.
♪ (UPBEAT MUSIC PLAYING) ♪
See! So, to recap,
-locks, oof, freezes, wee! -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Now-- now, here is the thing-- here's the thing on this.
Freezing and unfreezing of your credit can cost money
which will go back to these companies, because seemingly,
they just can't fucking lose on this.
And if you need any more proof of that,
on the very same day
that Congress was yelling at Equifax's former CEO,
it emerged that the company had just been awarded
a seven-million-dollar contract by the IRS, to prevent fraud,
which led one senator to make a pretty brutal comparison.
You realize, to many Americans right now, that looks like uh...
we're giving Lindsay "Lohawn" the keys to the mini bar.
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING IN SHOCK,) APPLAUDING)
I understand your point.
That was the pause of man thinking, "Do I let that pass?"
"Do I correct him on how to pronounce Lohan?"
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Or do I double down
and pronounce her name, "Lingonberry Lahoni Baloney."
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And you should know-- you should know
that IRS deal has been suspended,
not cancelled by the way, just suspended.
And that might make you angry but the problem is,
that anger won't have much impact on Equifax.
Because they make most of their money
selling our data to businesses, like banks.
So, in their eyes,
we are not the consumer, we're the product.
To think of it in terms of KFC.
We are not the guy buying the ten-piece buckets,
-we're the fucking chickens! -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
So, for the time being,
businesses are the only ones who can exert influence here
and as one colorfully dressed expert pointed out,
that's not gonna happen anytime soon.
I haven't heard any big company came out-- come out yet
and say, "We're not gonna use Equifax anymore"
-for their credit scores. -STUART VARNEY: Good point.
So far, everybody's been quiet,
and I don't know what they're waiting to hear.
This is outrageous, they should be done
but I bet you,
because it's America, they'll be okay.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Here's the truth,
that angry business casual farm animal on Fox Business
-is talking sense. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And that sentence alone shows just how bad things are.
So, in the long term,
there should clearly be major reform to this industry
and how it's regulated,
but that is going to take time, so until then
you need to freeze your credit reports
with all three of these companies,
and only unfreeze them
when you need to apply for credit.
And because the freeze option
can be hard to find on their sites
if you go to our twitter feed,
we will give you exact links to do that, and when you do,
they will give you a PIN number that you need to unfreeze it.
So, do not lose that number, or at the very least,
make it something memorable.
I don't know, like...
457-55-5462. -But not that, 'cause of course
that's Todd Davis's social security number.