Jobs. Literally, the only reason that anyone gets up before 11am.
Politicians care about jobs more than anything else,
as you can tell from how often they mention them.
These are the things I focus on. Jobs, jobs, jobs--
Jobs, jobs, jobs.
Jobs, jobs, and jobs. Period.
-Jobs... jobs... jobs. -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
It's about jobs, jobs, jobs. Good-paying jobs.
It's about jobs.
Jobs, jobs, jobs, and more jobs. American Jobs.
Politicians seem to think that jobs are like Beetlejuice.
If you just say the word a magic number of times,
eventually they'll just pop up out of nowhere.
Now, more specifically tonight, I'd like to talk about
one of the ways that politicians try to create jobs.
Economic development incentives.
And I know that that doesn't sound interesting.
Wait, wait, what are you doing?
You're putting me picture-in-picture?
Is that Entourage: The Movie?
Fine, you know what, switch over the audio,
listen to the first line. You'll be back.
I may have to jerk it before we even get there.
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -Oh! Oh, how about that?
All of a sudden, a show about economic development
doesn't seem like the worst thing
you could be watching, does it?
-(AUDIENCE LAUGHING) -So... (CLEARS THROAT)
-As I was saying... -(AUDIENCE CHEERS)
Economic development incentives are essentially when state
and local governments offer perks to companies
to entice them to build or expand in their area.
Here in New York
there is a program called StartUp New York
which launched with some pretty astounding tax breaks.
AD ANNOUNCER: Start-Up New York creates zero tax zones
for new businesses for ten years.
Zero property tax, zero corporate tax,
zero business tax, and zero income tax.
Wow. Zero property, corporate, business, and income tax.
(SLIDE WHISTLE ASCENDING)
And I believe that that sound you just heard
was Donald Trump getting an erection.
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
Wait for it. Don't wor-- Wait for it...
-(SLIDE WHISTLE DESCENDING) -It's gone again.
-(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING) -See ya next year, little buddy.
And look, it's not just New York.
All 50 states offer some kind of incentives,
like tax-breaks to attract companies,
and the argument is, that they attract employers,
which attract jobs, which lead to spending,
which creates more jobs and so on, and so on, and so on,
and many places have bought into this, hard,
trying to outbid one another for businesses.
Indiana even once took out attack ads on other states,
like this billboard, which read, "Illinnoyed by higher taxes?
Come to Indiana, a state that works."
And that's pretty aggressive, although, it's actually much
tamer than their original billboard,
"Just Arkan-saw your tax bill?
Ida-hope you like our tax breaks.
Because if you Colora-don't,
we'll Conneti-cut your fucking balls off."
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And if a company is big enough,
it can even start a bidding war itself.
That is actually happening right now, with Amazon.
They are planning to build a second headquarters
somewhere in North America
and they are making governments bid for it.
They even released eight pages of instructions for candidates
telling them to "think big and be creative,"
which led many cities to do stupid shit like this...
NEWS REPORTER 1: Overnight, the Big Apple
looking more like an orange.
New York City mayor, Bill de Blasio
lighting up the city in, quote, "Amazon orange."
The city of Birmingham is using giant Amazon boxes
to try to get Amazon's attention.
NEWS REPORTER 1: Stonecrest, Georgia offering to create
a new town of Amazon, Georgia.
They would create a new town and name it "Amazon."
You know, to compete, I'm not surprised
that Omaha, Nebraska didn't offer to let Jeff Bezos
kill any three people he likes.
'Cause you know he would. Look at him, he wants it so bad.
It's the only thing he can't have and he wants it.
And numerous mayors made direct appeals to Amazon
with videos ending in versions of the same bad joke.
Hey Alexa, where should Amazon locate HQ2?
ALEXA: Hmm. In Frisco, Texas.
Alexa, where is the most interesting company
in the world gonna locate?
ALEXA: Obviously, Washington, DC.
So, Alexa, where is the best place
for Amazon to locate its second world headquarters?
ALEXA: Danbury, Connecticut.
I told ya so.
You know, my one and only worry with all of those ads,
and I mean this sincerely, is, are they almost too hilarious?
But those stunts are just window-dressing.
What Amazon cares much, much more about,
as they mentioned in their instructions 21 times,
are incentives.
And while few places are revealing what they offered,
we do know that New Jersey reportedly offered
seven billion dollars in tax breaks,
which is an insane amount that other places
may now have to compete with, and think about what that means.
That could mean billions of tax dollars
that would not be collected for things like roads,
or schools, or hospitals, and Amazon already has
more money than it knows what to do with.
How else could you explain the existence of Goliath?
A show that, and this is true, literally nobody has ever seen.
Nobody. No human. No animal. Nobody.
-Nobod-- No one. -(AUDIENCE APPLAUDING)
Does it even exist?
If you make a show and no one watches it,
does it exist? Discuss.
And... And that is the thing here.
We give companies a lot of money through these incentives.
By one estimate, in 2015 they cost state
and local governments 45 billion dollars.
And that money can go to some questionable projects.
For instance, a few years ago,
Kentucky took a big swing on this...
A full-size replica of Noah's ark
is drawing thousands of visitors to Williamstown, Kentucky.
REPORTER 2: This is the Ark Encounter.
A chapter from Genesis told on a $100 million budget.
Four floors of Noah, his family,
and beasts great and small.
The project received $18 million in Kentucky tax incentives.
Eighteen million dollars
of tax breaks for a gigantic ark museum.
And I'm not saying that is inherently a bad idea,
I do kind of want to see this thing,
especially as its website genuinely has a section
devoted to the question, "What about all the manure?"
The answer, apparently, is,
"Slatted floors or multiple-level cages,"
which is really not a good answer,
'cause you do not want to be the animal on the lowest level
of that ship.
And while the ark clearly created some jobs,
there were some caveats to those positions...
REPORTER 3: Critics complain of discrimination in hiring.
Only Christians, no gays or lesbians,
and single people have to sign a chastity pledge.
-(AUDIENCE GASPS) -Oh, come on!
Aside from the homophobia,
chastity is a pretty weird rule to put in place for a museum
that's pretty much a gigantic replica of a floating fuck-zoo.
They... they weren't brought in two by two
so that everyone would have a swim-buddy,
they were on that boat to fuck.
(AUDIENCE APPLAUDS, CHEERS)
To fuck!
But the justification
for taking a gamble on a gigantic ark,
was that it would be a boom to the whole area,
and to hear one local official tell it,
the economic impact has been underwhelming.
The ark's success has not had the ripple effect
many hoped it would.
REPORTER 4: Downtown Williamstown,
which was expecting increased car and foot traffic,
has almost as many empty store-fronts
as occupied store-fronts.
REPORTER 5: What's it meant for downtown Williamstown?
Nothing.
I don't wanna sound negative in this interview, but...
there's nothing here.
Yeah, and that kind of makes sense
because once you've spent three hours walking around
a wooden boat with sexually frustrated tour guides
and haunted by the mental image of a miserable zebra
neck deep in shit,
'cause apparently decks were assigned alphabetically,
you're probably gonna skip lunch in town.
And look, a well-designed, closely monitored program
with clear goals might make sense to an area,
but too often the terms are extremely lax.
Some don't require that jobs be created at all,
and some require almost laughably few.
Remember StartUp New York? Zero taxes for a decade?...
-(SLIDE WHISTLE ASCENDING) -Oh shit, I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
Don't think about it, I'm sure it will pass.
That program is hiring requirements--
That program's hiring requirements
were that you create just one new job a year,
and the state recently considered
scaling that back to one new job in the first five years.
And sometimes these incentives are given out
even when they may not be necessary.
Take a look at Fargo, North Dakota.
-(SLIDE WHISTLE DESCENDING) -You know what, he's not wrong.
He's not wrong and I knew that would do the job.
Fargo gave a tax break to FedEx
for moving a facility to their city, but why?
Did they really need to?
'Cause just listen to what happened when one
city council member asked that very question
of a FedEx representative.
Mr. Wilson, if you don't get this exemption,
will you still move to Fargo?
-MR. WILSON: Yes, sir, we will. -Okay.
Yet, ten minutes later,
the council voted to give FedEx that exemption.
Why?
Also, if someone wants to willingly move to Fargo,
you don't offer them tax incentives,
you simply offer them a full psychological work-up
that starts with the question, "Who did you murder?
We'll still let you live here, but we do need to know."
(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
And then... Then there are programs
narrowly set up to encourage a particular industry to grow.
Which can sound great, but may not lead
to good, permanent jobs. Take film and TV incentives.
At some point in the last couple of decades,
nearly every state decided that they wanted to be
the next Hollywood, and now, 31 states
have incentive programs for film or TV.
The problem with that is, if you are one of them,
you have 30 other states competing with you... hard.
And because film productions are portable,
if you try and scale back your incentives,
they'll just go wherever a better deal is.
Just listen to this movie producer
who has taken advantage of multiple states' incentives.
I would never make a movie where I didn't get an incentive,
and I don't ever intend to.
But at the end of the day, if there's an incentive...
it's good for me.
-And look... -(AUDIENCE LAUGHING)
He's not wrong, I mean yes,
he looks like every woman's worst ex-boyfriend,
but he's-- he's not wrong.
It is not his job to worry about whether his incentives
are good for the states.
It is his job to, I'm assuming, refer to sushi as "sush,"
because he definitely does that.
But it should be someone, someone's job,
to worry about the effect of these programs.
And on some occasions when states have done that,
the news they got was not great.
For instance, Louisiana found that
for every dollar it spent on its film program,
it generated just 22 cents of tax revenue.
Which sounds bad, but which is still better
than Maryland, which made just 10 cents
for every dollar spent, which is still better
than Connecticut's program, which returned only
seven cents on the dollar.
That's like putting a dollar into a vending machine,
and getting a single, yellow Starburst in return.
At some point, what you're getting out
is not worth what you're putting in.
And defenders of economic incentives will say,
that's just a fraction of the broader economic benefit
that they bring. The problem is,
there's not much evidence for that.
And I know that accounting for the total economic impact
of anything is tricky, but we are gambling
billions of dollars on little more than faith.
And even basic information can be really hard to come by.
One study found that three quarters
of major state development programs
don't even disclose actual jobs created or workers trained.
So, we're basically throwing money down a hole
and hoping it bring us prosperity,
which is the exact business model
of a fucking wishing well.
(AUDIENCE LAUGHS)
And to see this at perhaps it's most pointless,
just look at Kansas and Missouri.
They've offered competing tax breaks
to businesses for years.
Which has made things particularly interesting
in one metro area.
So, I'm in Kansas City, Missouri.
That's it behind me. Uh, there is Kansas City, Kansas.
Two states, one metro area, but those states offer subsidies
for job creation. Create a job, you get a tax break.
So, what do businesses do?
A Missouri business will move some employees
over to Kansas City, Kansas and claim a tax break,
move 'em back, claim another tax break.
It's true.
For instance, Kansas City, Missouri
lost corporate offices for all these companies
to Kansas City, Kansas which, in turn,
lost offices for all these companies
to Kansas City, Missouri. And that isn't creating jobs
any more than moving your couch from the bedroom
to the living room is creating fucking furniture.
And this war has come at a real cost.
A local foundation has studied
two state-level incentives programs
and estimates that since 2009, around 6,600 jobs
have moved from Missouri to Kansas.
While around 5, 500 jobs
have moved from Kansas to Missouri.
Meaning there's been a net-gain of around 1,100 jobs
on the Kansas side of the line and a combined cost
to the two states of $331 million
in lost tax revenue, and think about that for a second.
You could create a program where the first 1,100 people
to move from-- to Kansas City from Missouri
would each get a Ferrari which they could then
drive around a giant pile of $30 million
that the state had set on fire
and you'd actually be fiscally responsible,
because you would have saved the area $20 million.
Look, it is pretty clear that economic development
needs to be done in a much smarter way.
And I don't fully blame the companies for this.
Because if governments are going to offer
ridiculous incentives, they are going to take them.
So, governments need to hold themselves,
and companies, more accountable.
And if companies aren't producing what they promised,
we need a system to claw our money back.
But to find that out, we're going to need
much more oversight over these programs
and what we're getting in return.
Although, I will tell you
one thing that I know for sure we got in return,
the Entourage movie.
That got a $5.8 million tax credit from California
and where else were they going to film Entourage?
Idaho? So, California, please know
that you indirectly had a hand in producing a movie,
which, may I remind you,
had this, for it's very first line...
I may have to jerk it before we even get there.
You know what, I've got to say this,
"Congratulations, Kentucky Ark Museum,
because somehow, you've become the second worst
tax-payer subsidized fuck-boat in this story."